# ROOT CASE STUDY

## Overview and Origin

* Name of company - Root, Inc.

* When was the company incorporated? - Root was founded in 2015. - https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/rootinsurance

* Who are the founders of the company? - Alex Timm and Dan Manges - https://www.forbes.com/sites/ashleaebeling/2020/02/12/the-future-of-insurance-fintech-50-2020/#46b5a3e821a3

* How did the idea for the company (or project) come about? For as long as he can remember, Alex Timm wanted to start an insurance company. At the age of 14, he started working at his dad's insurance agency. (https://www.forbes.com/sites/ashleaebeling/2020/02/12/the-future-of-insurance-fintech-50-2020/#46b5a3e821a3). He went on to study Actuarial Science, Accounting and Mathematics at Drake University before becoming a Senior Consultant at Nationwide Insurance. The idea for Root Insurance came at the intersection of two trends that Alex thought were going to revolutionalize the insurance industry - the prolifiration of smart phones and the rise of big data. (https://weare.techohio.ohio.gov/2019/11/13/founder-story-root-insurance/)

* How is the company funded? How much funding have they received? - Root raised $528M in venture capital funding beore going public in October 2020 (https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/rootinsurance). Its current market capitaliztion is $6.4B (https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/ROOT?p=ROOT&.tsrc=fin-srch).


## Business Activities:

* What specific financial problem is the company or project trying to solve? - Root helps drivers save money on car insruance by incentivizing safe driving. Root's smart phone application tracks customer driving habits, and rewards safe drivers with discounted car insurance. 

* Who is the company's intended customer?  Is there any information about the market size of this set of customers?
What solution does this company offer that their competitors do not or cannot offer? (What is the unfair advantage they utilize?) - Root's intended customer is insured drivers in the US. While coverage is not currently offered in every state, the Company is rapidly expanding within the US. Approximately 274 million vehicles were registered in the US in 2018, an increase from 193 million in 1990. (https://www.statista.com/statistics/183505/number-of-vehicles-in-the-united-states-since-1990/#:~:text=How%20many%20registered%20motor%20vehicles,at%206.3%20million%20in%202016). According to a 2019 study, there are 215 million insured drivers in the US, and 32 million uninsured drivers. (https://aronberglaw.com/uninsured-motorist-statistics-2019-uninsured-drivers-state/#:~:text=All%20over%20the%20country%2C%20there,the%20roads%20without%20any%20coverage.) The current US auto insurance market is estimated at $309 billion. (https://www.ibisworld.com/industry-statistics/market-size/automobile-insurance-united-states/) The competitive advantage of Root is that it leverages technology to analyze driving behavior that is more predictive of accidents and claims. This allows Root to price risk more accurately than legacy insurance companies that rely on demographic data as the biggest determinant of rates, which results in more affordable insurance rates for its customers. "Root’s believes their data capabilities establish a flywheel that enables the company to more accurately underwrite risk and more effectively price their product. Better pricing leads to increased growth and scale which feeds their data capture." (https://www.meritechcapital.com/blog/root-insurance-ipo-s-1-breakdown#:~:text=During%20an%20initial%20driving%20period,support%20from%20their%20mobile%20device.) Per their S-1 filing, Root believes it has the largest data set of miles driven, driving behavior and accidents in the market, which gives it a competitive advantage over its peers.

* Which technologies are they currently using, and how are they implementing them? (This may take a little bit of sleuthing–– you may want to search the company’s engineering blog or use sites like Stackshare to find this information.) - First, Root use smart phones, mobile internet, and telematics. Customers can get a policy without ever talking to an agent. They simply download the app, take a photo of their driver's license, and the forms are prepopulated. The customer is then subjected to a test period in which the app analyzes data regarding his or her driving behavior, including speed, braking, turning and time-of-day driven. Once the test drive is over, the customer is given a quote. The biggest factor in the price of the policy is the customer's driving behavior. Everything related to the policy is managed through the app, from cancelling the policy to reporting claims. (https://www.guidewire.com/blog/industry-trends/driving-insurance-innovation-root-insurance) The core technology that allows Root to track and transmit the large amounts of data necessary for their business model is telematics, which refers to the 'branch of information technology which deals with long-distance transmission of computerized data.' Further, the Company belives machine learning applied to increasing amounts of customer/driving data which drives its proprietary risk scoring system gives it a competitive advantage that legacy insurance companies who will struggle to replicate (https://www.meritechcapital.com/blog/root-insurance-ipo-s-1-breakdown#:~:text=During%20an%20initial%20driving%20period,support%20from%20their%20mobile%20device.). Per Root's S-1 filing, "By collecting and synthesizing massive amounts of rich, sensory behavioral data across thousands of driving variables, including distracted driving, we strive to price based more on causality than correlation. This allows us to price our customers’ policies more fairly—and in turn they pay premiums commensurate with their individual risk profile." Lastly, Root's model eliminates the need for insurance agents, and their commissions. The result is cost savings passed down to the customer.


## Landscape:

* What domain of the financial industry is the company in? Root operates in the InsurTech domain. It has a first-mover advantage in the auto insurance sector of the InsurTech domain, as its main competitors are mature companies with outdated modes of measuring risk and pricing policies.

* What have been the major trends and innovations of this domain over the last 5-10 years? The major trends and innovation of this domain over the last 5-10 years have been the rise of smart phones, big data, telematics and machine learning. Smart phones with sensors that track 1,000s of data points allow Root to analyze a customer's driving habits. Massive amounts of data produced by thousands of customers over billions of miles driven can be transmitted over long distances to Root for analysis. Machine learning algorithyms analyze the data for patterns in a driver's behavior that suggest he or she is more likely to get in an accident and file a claim. As Root's customer base grows, it collects more driving data which causes its algorithym to be more predictive of risk, allowing Root to more accurately and competitively price its policies which further expands its market share.

* What are the other major companies in this domain? The majorie companies in the domain include house-hold names such as Geico, Progressive and Allstate.


## Results

* What has been the business impact of this company so far? Root has gained significant traction in this domain since it was founded in 2015. 

* What are some of the core metrics that companies in this domain use to measure success? How is your company performing, based on these metrics? The core metrics in the auto insurance domain are Direct Written Premium (DWP), Policies in Force, and Premiums per Policy. These metrics are the fundamental drivers of top line revenue. Direct Written Premiums refer to premiums for insurance policies written during the period and underwritten by Root (i.e, excludes policies re-insured by a 3rd party). According to their S-1, DWPs nearly doubled from $89M in Q1'19 to $164M in Q1'20. Policies in Force refer to the number of active policyholders, and has increased from $176M in Q1'19 to $337M in Q1'20. Premiums per Policy measure the premiums Root expects to earn from each policy, and has increased from $770 in Q1'19 to $881 in Q1'20. These metrics indicate strong continued growth.

* How is your company performing relative to competitors in the same domain? Comparing Root to relative to mature competitors in the auto insurance domain is difficult as they're in vastly different stages of development. Root is currently running at a significant loss and cash burn rate as it attempts to capture market share from the major players in the space. Going public, however, allowed Root to raise a significant amount of cash to continue to fund its operations as it seeks to expand its customer base, and broaden its product offerings to include renters and homeowners insurance.


## Recommendations

* If you were to advise the company, what products or services would you suggest they offer? (This could be something that a competitor offers, or use your imagination!) - Root is expanding into renters and home insurance markets, which makes some sense in that it creates cross sell opportunities geared toward current customers. But its bread and butter is auto insurance; its competitive advantage is the massive amounts of data it owns and its ability to process that data in a way that increasingly predictive of which drivers are most likely to file claims. Root has formed strategic partnerships with companies like GasBuddy, an app drivers' use to find cost saving opportunities on gas, which helps the Company collect more driving data and access to a customer base that is concerned with saving on the cost of driving. Continuing to pursue partnerships like this will increase the data advantage Root has over its competition. In terms of other products or services you can offer over the long-term, I believe Root should consider if it's growing data set can be used as a competitive advantage in other markets. Is driving behavior predictive of behavior in other markets? Can Root combine this data with other data available through strategic partnerships, or buy data collected from data brokers, and analyze it in a way that allows it to tap into other markets? I think it's an idea worth exploring in the future when and if Root owns a large piece of market share in the auto insurance industry and searches for continued growth. Another idea would be to leverage its data processing tool with increasing speed and accuracy which allows it to effictively change its rates in real time or as reguarly as possible. For instance, if a customer initially scores a low safe driver rating, Root could continue to analyze the customer's behavior as it drives and continuosly reassess its rating as more information becomes avaiable, continuously adjusting his or her rates as in real time. 

* Why do you think that offering this product or service would benefit the company? - Real time rate adjustments would incentivize the driver to continuously improve driving behavior, decreasing claims and lowering Root's rates. It gameifys the process, as customers pursue higher and higher driver scores.

* What technologies would this additional product or service utilize? - Root could use its current underlying technologies. As Root's machine learning capabilities become more and more predictive, and it's ability to track and analyze data increases, it further separates itself from competition.

* Why are these technologies appropriate for your solution? - At this point in its maturity, Root is on the cutting edge of technology in the insurance domain. However, it should look to maintain that advantage by exploring new technologies as they become available.
